# {{project-name | title_case}}

This is an autogenerated README.md file for the "{{project-name | title_case}}" app.

By default, this app has a basic service, query service, plugin, and UI.

## Build

To build the app,

1. Run `yarn && yarn build` in the app's `ui` directory.
2. Run `cargo-psibase package` in the app's root directory.

That's it! A package will be generated at `./target/wasm32-wasip1/release/packages/{{project-name | upper_camel_case}}.psi`

## Test

To run the tests,

1. Run `cargo-psibase test` in the app's `service` directory.

## Run

To run the app,

1. Run a local single-node network using psinode, as usual.
2. Deploy the app to the network by running `cargo-psibase install` from the app's root directory.

### View UI

The UI is served at the `{{ project-name }}` subdomain of your local psinode network.
A graphiql interface is also served at the `/graphiql` endpoint.

## Permissions management example

Apps can implement privileged methods, e.g., require an authed user. `setExampleThing()` demonstrates a mechanism for apps to call it (a privileged method) and--with minimal additional implementation--allow the user to approve access from a particular calling app. Permissions obviously can be handled many different ways; here we only demonstrate one method-specific permission. `prompt_user()` is a way to query a user to grant a permission (something like some oauth flows) with an authoritative source of critical permission parameters, e.g., logged-in user, caller, callee, etc.
